So the question is, can we do better?
Can we have array access with
the ability to grow, right?
That's kind of what we want in life
is that it's something that I assume
at least we all want that, right?
And the answer, of course, is yes.
Now remember, I did say with an array we
can write these operations in, right?
We can do a for loop and
shift everything over, or shift it back.
If we want to delete it
we can do these things.
We just have to write
these things ourselves.
Now in some languages,
they just provide it.
Like if you think about JavaScript, you
actually have a list implementation where
you can choose between a Linked List, and
now what is referred to as an ArrayList.
It's an ArrayList where instead
of having underlying containers,
we have an array of generic T,
and we can use that.
And when we need to grow
we have to grow it.
So let me explain how this one works.
Cuz it's actually pretty neat idea and
it's also gonna be the basis
of a lot of other algorithms.
Maps are gonna use these,
ring buffers are gonna use these,
it's a very pretty simple concept.
So let's just say we have
an array that is from 0 to 3, and
let's just say we're storing numbers,
right?
It doesn't matter what we're storing.
And so we have in here, we have 2, right?
That's all we have in here so far.
That means we have a length of 1, right?
We have one item in there,
but we have a capacity of 3.
Does that make sense?
We can store up to three numbers but
we have a length of one.
So that means if we were to do a get
operation, say a get with an index, well,
we could do a couple things.
A, we can use our length that we're kind
of holding on to that we're maintaining,
as a way to say hey,
you're either accessing in, or within or
without of our array.
So if you exceed this index, so if IDX is
greater than or equal to length, well,
then we could throw some sort of error,
whatever we want to do, right?
You're accessing outside of the bounds.
If you're to be more JavaScript,
you could just return undefined, right?
That'd be a pretty
acceptable way to do things.
So if we wanted to push something though,
what could we do?
Well, pushing actually
isn't all that hard.
We could literally have the length,
which right now is set to one, and
we can say, hey, length,
are you within my capacity?
You're within the capacity?
Awesome, I'm going to push the value
in then, or right there, and
then increment my length
to point to the next part.
So we're actually creating a push
operation on top of an array.
So that's what an array list is, is using
an array as the fundamental datatype
instead of a node-based structure, and
then doing these pushes, these pull or
pops, and
being able to do these operations.
So obviously,
push is pretty dang good, right?
We are just able to write that,
it's pretty quick, how fast,
what would be the big
O of a push operation?
So let's break it down.
Remember, use your length, write it
to an array, increment your length.
What would be the runtime of that?
>> Constant?
>> Constant, that's right, because none
of those things depend on the input.
Notice I didn't ever say the input,
I only said the length, so
that's not traversing the length,
it's just simply using the length,
and adding a number constant,
we consider it constant.
There we go.
Now, what about pop?
Well, pop is the exact same thing, right?
Which can return either T,
or undefined, right?
So exact same thing,
we're gonna use length minus 1,
we'll grab out that value,
then we can decrement the length.
So yeah, this value, if it's, say just for
storing numbers, it can technically
remain within the array.
We don't actually zero out the data.
You could zero out the data
if you want to, but
you also don't have to zero out
the data with primitive structures.
If you're using a language that uses
pointers, you can technically still leave
them in there because there's nothing
that you're actually doing, right?
Unless if it's of course a shared pointer,
using some like rust, blah blah,
there could be all different ways in
which you would want to clean this up.
But in general, if we're just talking
about a simple array underneath the hood,
you don't actually have to clean it
up because you are using length to
keep track of what you own, right?
And you only clean up as you need to.
In Java land you'd probably want to
set it to null, because nulls are you
releasing a pointer to an object,
thus it can be garbage collected, right?
There is some dangers there, but
understand your environment and
what you're doing, and
why you'd want to clean it up or
not clean it up is always a good plan.
But this is effectively an ArrayList.
Makes a lot of sense.
Now the real question you're
probably asking yourself is,
what happens with push when
we exceed capacity, right?
So if I were to push push, then push once
more, well, something has to happen,
because our length is currently equal
to our capacity at the moment of push.
We've ran out of room to do this.
So one thing we can do is we can create
a new array of some longer length.
Let's say six, say we double our capacity.
Then we could mem copy or just do a for
loop, and copy them in one at a time,
where we actually move
over all of our values.
Then our length would still point right
here, our capacity now becomes six,
and we can now easily
handle the push operation.
So this is effectively what
an ArrayList does underneath the hood,
is it contains some actual array
structure, and then helps you make it so
that it's dynamic, that it grows.
That's why you're always gonna see
a capacity on a lot of these more
traditional structures, is because it
actually is starting off with hey,
give me a hint about how
much you want to use.
In that way I don't allocate
too much memory, and
that way you're not using
a bunch of empty space.
Cuz if it starts off by saying hey
my initial capacity is 30,000,
that could be way too much.
It's just wasting a bunch of memory.
So it's a game here.
There's definitely a game you have
to play in which you want to be as,
use the least amount of memory but
do the least amount of growing operations.
I spent pop obviously redact, I mean,
I've never seen a data structure
that actually reduces its capacity
once it reaches a certain point.
I mean I guess you could if you had to
be very, very efficient about memory,
say you're using an extremely
low memory device.
You could do that, but
I've never seen that personally.
So there we go,
that's the effects of an ArrayList.
But let's think about it, cuz we've only
covered two operations, push and pop,
which are stack like operations.
What about queue-like operations?
queue or enqueue and dequeue.
Well, if we were to do that on
an ArrayList, if we were to take this and
say we had the values 2, 3 and
5 in our underlying ArrayList,
we have a length of 3, we have
a capacity of 3, and we do a enqueue.
What's gonna have to happen?
Well, first, we're gonna have
to grow our capacity, right?
We're not able to actually
sustain any further items.
So let's say we grow our capacity,
awesome.
Our capacity is now 6, right, and so
now we can insert at length, correct?
Cuz our length is 3, so it's actually
pointing at the empty spot, awesome,
we can now insert.
Well, I guess that's for push for n and q.
What's the problem here?
The problem is actually quite simple.
You can't just right, this is an array.
if you write, it writes over the value.
So what are you gonna have to do?
You're gonna have to start here and
go move over one,
move over one, move over one.
Now we have created a spot
in that position for
you to be able to insert
into the ArrayList.
And so that's why often you'll see people
getting up in arms about using insert
into the front of a list, because if
it's an ArrayList you have to do an N
like operation, and actually shift
over all of your underlying values.
And they're very, very not performant.
And that's why you see people liking,
say queues with node-based items,
because you can do this in O(1)
operation, not O(N).
So exact same thing with dequeue as well.
If you do a dequeue, what happens?
Well, the dequeue, you're gonna have to
literally shift over every single item,
and you can right over and
then you're gonna have to shift
over this direction, right?
And now you've just shifted everything
back, cuz you want to be able to do get
zero, and you want to expect
the zeroeth item to be an item.
If you don't do that you have
the first item being an item and
then the zeroeth item being one,
you've either already pushed or
a value you've already cleaned up,
which is gonna be fundamentally wrong.
And so this makes ArrayList really, really
bad with enqueue and dequeue, but really,
really good with push and pop, right?
You see why this is the way it is.
And you could effectively say that as
long as you're pushing and popping and
you reach some sort of stable state,
you're gonna have a O(1)
performance pushing and popping.
It never has to grow the array,
it never has to do anything,
it's just very,
very contained in a certain capacity.
Awesome.
Same thing applies obviously to the middle
of a list, just in case I didn't cover it.
If you said hey,
delete at the fifth index,
everything beyond the fifth
index needs to be shifted down.
So those are O(N) operations.
All right, let's see, did I miss anything?
I don't think so.
Running time, yep, we talked about
all the deletion/insertions,
they're the same thing, right?
If you insert,
you have to shift everything over.
If you delete, you have to shift
everything over the other direction.
They're pretty straightforward,
I think I'm gonna skip the implementation
on this one, just because it is, again,
a very lengthy implementation and
it's not very hard.
You see the for loops you have to do,
you go to that index, and
you just have to shift over values.
Not too hard on this one.
There we go.
So which one is better, right?
Which one would you rather use,
an Array List or a Linked List?
>> Does it depend on the situation?
>> Man, it's like you guys knew the thing!
It should always be it depends, right?
It is always it depends.
Whenever someone asks that in
an interview, say it depends.
It depends on the situation.
That's why I always do so terrible.
I emotionally do so terrible at Google
interviews cuz they're always like,
let's say we're inserting and
removing millions of items.
I'm like, well, I mean,
you're really doing 100 million items on a
single machine, are you really doing this?
This already seems so not even feasible.
Let's talk about why you're doing that,
right?
I've already lost the battle.
It just seems so fake, but
experimentally, it depends.
If you're pushing and popping from
the end, well, either a Linked List or
an ArrayList can work quite well.
You get a little bit more conveniences
cuz often with an ArrayList you also have
like say angle bracket accessing.
You can have that with a Linked List,
but doesn't often happen.
But at the exact same time you have
random access with an ArrayList.
Give me index three.
That's constant time.
That's really really good, but
you do not remove from the front.
So there's definitely a trade-off, there's
definitely a trade-off graph somewhere on
there that you have to be careful of.
Getting sucks on Linked List; removing
from the front, sucks on ArrayList.
And so long as you can explain
that to your interviewer,
they're usually pretty happy about that.
I in fact, even have a question that
Netflix I used to ask all the time,
which was implement
an async request queue,
in which only three requests
can be out at any one time.
Or three async operations
And when they inevitably use an array,
or use the JavaScript brackets,
I'd go,
why would you not want to use those?
And they'd say, well, I'm using them
because you can do shift and non-shift.
And I go, okay, well, I mean if
you have a million items in there,
do you still use them?
And they go, yeah, why not?
And I know for a fact they haven't thought
about the fact, that when you remove or
add to the front, you are fundamentally
having to shift everything.
I want to hear these words out of their
mouth because it is very, very important,
you understand what you do and
aren't doing, right?
I don't care that you don't
know how to implement.
Who cares you don't know
how to implement it?
You just have to understand that there
is a cost at some point in the system.